# Loops and comppound data types
In a few short weeks, we've already seen quite a few ways to make our JavaScript programs carry out actions and react to the user:
- functions
- conditionals
- event listeners
- `prompt` for user input
- storing results in variables

There's one main control structure we're still missing: *loops*. Loops are a way to execute some code over and over again without writing it repeatedly.

We also need to talk about ways to store different pieces of data together using *compound data types*: arrays, and objects. In particular, for loops and arrays go together like peanut butter and jelly.

After today's class, there will still be a lot more JavaScript features we haven't spoken about, but none of them are as essential as the ones we'll finish covering today.

Once we have this in our toolbelt, we'll spend more time practicing the JavaScript we know, instead of spending every class learning more and more. We'll learn more HTML and CSS and get better at using JavaScript to make our webpages interactive and interesting. And we'll start spending more class time brainstorming our projects so we can get started on coding them this month.

## while loops
A `while` loop looks almost like an `if` statement, except for the keyword:

```
while (true) {
  console.log('the truth');
}
```

Again, what is between the parentheses is called the `condition` of the while loop, and it should be of type "boolean". Then we open a block with a curly brace, put our code inside the `body` of the loop, and close the block with another curly brace.

What do you think will happen when we run that code?

Infinite loops are usually something to avoid. (But not always! Maybe your game really should keep running forever.)

Here's a more realistic example of how we might actually use a while loop:
```
// add up the numbers from 1 to 10
var sum = 0;
var count = 1;

while (count <= 10) {
  sum = sum + count;
  count = count + 1;
}
```

Take close note of the condition of this while loop. Be mindful of "off-by-one" errors!

Here's a shorthand way to write the same loop:
```
while (count <= 10) {
  sum += count;
  count++;
}
```

Exercises:
```
Write a while loop to multiply the numbers from 1 to 10.
Write a while loop to print out all the numbers from 1 to 100.
Modify your while loop to only print out even numbers.
Enrichment: look up the `break` and `continue` statements online, and write loops that use them.
```

## arrays
An `array` is used to store multiple values in a single variable.

Array basics:
- syntax: `var myArray = [1, 2, "you can put anything in an array", true]`
- indexing - `myArray[0]`, `myArray[1]`
  - be careful of "off-by-one" errors!
- properties, e.g. `myArray.length`
- methods, e.g. `myArray.push("something")` and `var x = myArray.pop()`

Code-along: let's write a while loop which fills up an array with the numbers 1 to 100.

## for loops
There are two main types of for loop in JavaScript:
```
// modern style
for (var x of myArray) {
  // do something with x
}
```
Code-along: let's write a function which takes an array as an argument, and prints out each element one by one.

```
// old school
//  initialize;     condition;      increment
for (var i = 0; i < myArray.length; i++) {
  // do something with myArray[i]
}
```

Code-along: let's write a function using a for loop which prints the numbers from 0 to 20, along with the word "even" or "odd" depending which is true for the given number. We'll use a new binary operator, `%`, pronounced `modulo` or `mod`.

Exercises:
```
Write a function which takes an array as an argument, and doubles every number in the array.
Write a function which takes an array and of numbers and retains only the odd numbers.
```

Challenge exercise: write a function called "fizzbuzz" which:
- prints the numbers 1 to 100, except that it
- prints "fizz" if the number is divisible by 3
- prints "buzz" if the number is divisible by 5
- prints "fizzbuzz" if the number is divisible by both


## Objects
An "object" in JavaScript is a collection of key-value pairs:
```
var person = {
  name: "Nabil",
  age: 29,
  hobbies: ["boxing", "chess", "music", "reading"],
}
```

We can read out properties a lot like arrays, but by the key name rather than by index.
The keys must be strings, but the values may be any type.

What will be logged here? `console.log(person['age']);`

Another way to do the same thing: `console.log(person.age)`

Exercise: make an object with the same properties as mine, but with your own name, age, and hobbies. Add a few more properties as well. How can you list out all of your hobbies to the screen?

## Challenge exercises if you're done early
Enhance your "night mode" webpage with the ability to cycle through a few different colors, instead of just one.

Implement the factorial function. There are at least two ways: using a for loop, and using if statements and *recursion*.

Bonus challenge *only if you've finished recursive factorial*: implement a fibonacci function. If you get it to work, try it first with small numbers, and then with big ones. Does it work with large numbers? If not, try to think of why. Ask Nabil for a hint if you get stuck.

## Enrichment: "functional programming"
Some array patterns are so common that it can become very repetitive to write them over and over.
For example, there's a million code snippets that look basically like:

```
var output = [];
for (var x of myArray) {
  output.push(someFunction(x));
}
```

The basic idea is to do the same thing to each element of the array.
JavaScript arrays have a builtin method `map` which does the same thing:

```
var output = myArray.map(someFunction);
```

One line instead of four to achieve the same goal! Nice.

There's a similar idea for when you want to keep only certain elements of an array.
If you have code that looks like this:

```
var output = [];
for (var x of myArray) {
  if(someTestFunction(x)) {
    output.push(x);
  }
}
```

You can use the array's buitin method filter like so:
```
var output = myArray.filter(someTestFunction);
```

The `output` array will contain only those elements of `myArray` for which calling `someTestFunction` returns `true` or some "truthy" value -- the same situation where the code inside of the `if` statement will run.

Exercises: rewrite your answers to "for loop" exercises 2 and 3 above to instead use `map` and `filter`.

## submit your work!
I want to check out your code! As always, use [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfJhvobRSHGva_j9IIJN4IAGnI1hc1CtAzR_PtFKln1YlVHFA/viewform) so I can see what you wrote.


# Project discussion
Let's do some more informal brainstorming about our final projects! Next week we'll start some writing about them.
