# Rolling your own server
On Tuesday, we studied how to use the browser's builtin XMLHttpRequest object to talk to different webpages,
and get more information onto our pages based on what we download.

We saw how HTTP (and a lot of other computer network communication protocols) follow a *request-response* model,
where a *client* first asks for some information or asks for some action to be carried out
and a *server* then responds with some answer or acknowledgement of the action, or gives an error message.
Under this model, servers will not just tell clients something without being asked first.
(That is possible under some other models, e.g. Websockets which is what you would probably use for a chat application.)

Today let's start with a little review of how that code works, and then move on to studying how we can write our own servers.

## Review of how to make HTTP calls on a webpage to some API
[Here is the code from Tuesday](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/gakko-apis?path=script.js:1:0) --
let's go through it quickly to make sure we understand what is happening.

## Getting started with writing our own server
On Glitch, create a new project, but instead of choosing the "hello-webpage" starter, choose "hello-express".

Let's take a few minutes to read the code that exists now, understand what it does, and what it doesn't do.
This is the basis for creating our own custom API that does stuff no one has else has done before!

(Eventually, the group(s) that need database should probably also check out the hello-sqlite starter,
but that is more complicated than this example which already has a few new things going on,
so that will probably be a private session instead of a whole group lesson.)

## Code dependencies
Let's take a little bit of time to check out the `package.json` file.

The most interesting part of this object is the value associated with the key "dependencies".

By adding different *libraries* here, we can pull in code that other people have already written, and use it in our own programs.

I'm not going to go into detail about versioning of code libraries,
but the short version is that just like we change our code, library authors change their code too.
To try to make sure they don't break other people's code,
they associate each version with a number so you can know what has changed or stayed the same and use the right version you want.

You can look up "semantic versioning" if you want more details.

## Understanding the server
This code is new, but mostly "boilerplate" for getting an express.js server up and running via node.js.

Let's read it and try commenting out or modifying code to see what happens and how it works.

## Understanding the client
The HTML, CSS and JavaScript files inside the `public` folder in your project should mostly look familiar,
after the review/introduction of XMLHttpRequest.

Let's make sure we understand how this piece interacts with our server.js files,
and make some changes and see how they're reflected.

New things we haven't seen yet in this client.js:
- `require` is how we import code libraries that we've told Glitch we need via our `package.json` file
- `const` is like `var`, but we can't reassign the variable later
- `preventDefault` is a function that stops a form submission from going to a new page (the default action on the web)
- `forEach` is a function that works like a `for` loop -- let's rewrite it in that style!

## Enhancing the client and server
Let's add our own brand new, custom API endpoint to our server!

And then let's change the client to talk to this new API endpoint!

## Project worktime
The rest of today is for you all to work on your own projects -- let me know what you need help with!
