# Fundamental concepts of web APIs
After a few days of all project time, and one day when I was sick, let's do a short lesson before more project work time!

Today's lesson is about how to use the browser's built-in ability to make requests to different web pages, and how we can use that to make our own pages more dynamic.

Future lessons will build on this to see how we can set up our own servers instead of only talking with someone else's servers, automatically process a lot of web pages, and do real-time communication like what a chat app would use.

[Follow along with the code here](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/gakko-apis?path=script.js:1:0) -- feel free to remix to modify it yourself.

## Making a web API request from the browser
We can use the JavaScript `XMLHttpRequest` to tell our client to make `request`s to servers.
Those servers will give us a `response` with the data we want, or telling us that something went wrong.
See the code examples for how!

HTTP, the protocol for getting site pages and other data over the web, is built on this "request-response" model. And so are a lot of other systems that have nothing to do with the web!

The name "XMLHttpRequest" is an accident of history -- it really has nothing to do in particular with XML, except that that's what people were using it for at first. Nowadays it's more common to use it to fetch JSON. It can be used to get any type of data at all.


## HTTP verbs
There are a lot of different HTTP verbs that can be used to tell servers what we want.
Two are the most common and important: GET and POST.

This is the first parameter to the `req.open` function, if we've created a new variable for making requests with code like `var req = new XMLHttpRequest();`.

### GET
GET means fetch some information from the server. You expect the server already knows the answer, and you want it to tell you.

### POST
POST means you have some information that you want the server to store, or you have in mind some action that you want the server to take.
You probably need to enclose some specific data along with the request, unlike GET, where the URL contains everything to answer the request.

The server might expect the data in different ways, but one of the most common is "form encoded". See the code example for how to tell the server that that's the kind of data you're sending along.


## Status codes
There a lot of HTTP status codes a server might reply with. You can look them up online: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes]()

Here are general patterns:
- 1xx: Informational -- you probably won't see this
- 2xx: Success -- here's the data you wanted
- 3xx: Redirection -- try looking at this other URL instead
- 4xx: Client error -- try fixing your code, or logging in, or...
- 5xx: Server error -- not much you can do about someone else's broken code, unless you're the one running the server!

The most common status codes you'll see are `200 OK` and `404 Not Found`.


## Reading API documentation
If a company wants you to use their API, they'll provide some information online about how to use it. Learning to read these documents is an important part of building an application that uses APIs.

Usually, the code examples are the most interesting part of the documentation. I often don't spend a lot of time, or any time, reading the rest of what they have to say.

Remember, when writing software, the cost of failure is low -- try making some requests and if they don't work, then whatever! Try again, read some more, try again.

## Setting up API keys
Many services don't let anyone just keep hitting their servers over and over again for free, because it costs them money to keep servers running. Often, you have to register with the company and set up an API key, which may also want you to sign up for billing. But there's often a free trial that's more than enough for learning!

Let's check out this Google Maps example of this.

Oftentimes, you want to keep this API key a secret, so it lives only on your server and not the HTML, CSS and JavaScript code that anyone who is accessing your website can see. We'll revisit this issue next time when we talk about setting up our own servers.

Drawbacks of this approach over something like web scraping or setting up your own server: if Google or Twitter or whoever changes the way their API works, you have to change your code too! That can be pretty annoying, as I've found out a few times myself.

## Debugging with the network tab
In your developer tools, another tab besides "Console" is "Network".

You can use that tool to see what are the different resources your browser is trying to access when you go to any page!

You can see what responses various servers give back for different requests your client made.

If you look very closely at the requests you make, you might notice that the URL doesn't look quite like what you said -- if you're curious about the difference, try looking up "URL encoding".

## What's all this for?
Understanding the basics of HTTP specifically, and the request-response model of communication generally, is the basis for:
- setting up your own servers to create your own API or use a database
- doing web scraping by automatically downloading and processing
- real-time communication, like chat apps, not built on the request-response model

## More resources
- https://launchschool.com/books/http/read/introduction
- http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/ehchua/programming/webprogramming/http_basics.html
