# Project day!
Today I have just a few review exercises for you. Most of the day will be about your projects!

We'll also have a class discussion about the connections between computing and climate change -- get excited.

Everyone moves through projects at their own pace, for lots of reasons, so it's no problem at all if you need to plan more before jumping into code.
It's also great if you do get started coding today, or if you keep working on something you've begun already!

## Upcoming events
Gakko Hackathon for weekend of Nov 10th cancelled :( hopefully to take place Spring 2019.

But if you were planning on attending that, maybe you can save the date for the final showcase at my other job!

School for Poetic Computation fall 2018 class final showcase
Saturday and Sunday November 10th and 11th -- 4-9 PM Sat, 12-5 PM Sun
155 Bank St (in the West Village, between Washington St and the West Side Highway)

## Planning and wireframing
In the design process for real world applications, it's very common to draw some sketches and diagrams of a few things:
- site layout
- user interactions
- internal code architecture

The first two especially are referred to as "wireframes".
There are some software tools to draw wireframes, or you can even use something like Google Presentations,
but personally I'm a fan of hand-drawn wireframes.

I will draw some of the wireframes (from memory) that I used when designing the [#FreeThemNY website](http://freethemny.com), for demonstration.

Take a few moments to draw some sketches of your vision for your final project!
Feel free to add a few notes about what each page is for.

We can spend more time another day on diagrams of how our code will accomplish the desired tasks for the users of our pages.

## JavaScript review
Let's do a code-along to solve an exercise from last time, starting from the [many-color-changing page](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/gakko-many-color-mode?path=script.js:3:0)
we were working on before. You could find your own project, or remix that link.

Code-along exercise:
Write a function which takes two arguments, an array and an item which might be in the array,
and returns a random item that is not the same as the second argument.
(You can use a function like this to choose random colors and always have the button make a change.)

After writing it, let's see how we could use our function from the browser so that the color always changes!
And let's also see how we could use that function in a completely different context, on the command line.
This is how passing different arguments enables **code re-use**.

More exercises:
1. Write a function that takes two numbers as arguments, and returns a random whole number in between those bounds.
2. Write a function 
3. Fizzbuzz: write a function which prints all of the numbers from 1 to 100,
but prints "Fizz" instead of the number if the number is divisible by 3,
and prints "Buzz" instead of the number if the number is divisible by 5,
and prints "Fizzbuzz" instead of the number if the number is divisible by 15.
4. Challenge (revisited): look up "recursion" and try implementing the factorial function by calling your own factorial function!
5. Super challenge (revisited): use recursion to implement the Fibonnaci numbers, figure out why it might be slow, and then fix it!

## Class discussion: climate change, computing, and all our relationships
If you want, you can watch [this full-length (~40 min) talk I gave in May at a software development conference called Deconstructconf in Seattle](https://www.deconstructconf.com/2018/nabil-hassein-computing-climate-change-and-all-our-relationships).
The [slides are on my website here](https://nabilhassein.github.io/slides/deconstructconf-2018/assets/player/KeynoteDHTMLPlayer.html#0).

Here are some of the main themes of the talk:
- The division between the Global North and the Global South is hugely important to understanding the world economy, politics and society.
- That larger social and historical context is expressed in our field of computing in many ways.
- As technologists, we participate in oppressive systems of resource extraction, labor exploitation, policing and militarism.
- Computers and programming contribute directly and indirectly to climate change, especially certain recent developments like Bitcoin.
- This is a specific instance of the general fact that only a minority of people globally are causing runaway climate change, but everyone is affected by it, with the people who are the least responsible suffering the most.
- Possible paths to stop climate disaster are well understood, but are not taken because of the power of fossil fuel companies and other rich people who are doing very well now, unlike most people.

Starting questions for discussion:
- What do you think about your relationships with the workers who physically produced the machines you use? How about your relationships to all the people who contribute labor to running websites like Facebook or Google?
- How do we build technology with ecology in mind?
- Can we build technology for our communities and other people trying to change the system, instead of for the profit of large corporations or venture capitalists?
- How do you relate this discussion to other political conversations you participate in in your communities, or hear/read about in the media?

## Project time
The remainder of today's class time is yours to work on your project as you see fit!
Talk with me and with other students about your ideas, write them down, draw wireframe sketches of different pages within your application, and write code!
