# Enhancing the interactivity of our web pages with JavaScript
## Review
Last week, we did *a lot* with JavaScript! We learned about:
- conditional statements (`if` / `else if` / `else`)
- logic operators (`&&` / `||` / `!`)
- arithmetic operators (`<` / `<=` / `>` / `>=` / `===` / `!==` / `%`)
- loops (`for` / `while`)
- arrays (`[1, 2, 3]` / `["blue", "red", "green"]`)

Today, let's review some of these things and see how we can use them to make our webpages more interactive than ever.

We'll also learn about a special function in JavaScript, `Math.random`, so that our webpages can surprise even us!

## Code-along
Let's change our night mode web page so that there are actually three possibilities!

[Start with this project](https://gakko-many-color-mode.glitch.me/) based on what we did last week, and click "Remix" from the fish menu to make your own.

## Review of modular arithmetic
Our color changing page works the way we want it to at first, but then it gets stuck! Why?

We can solve this by using the `%` operator we looked at a little bit last week.
Before we used it to tell if numbers were odd or even, but `%` can do a lot more than that.

In general, `A / B = Q remainder R`
- A is the dividend
- B is the divisor
- Q is the quotient
- R is the remainder

Examples:
```
0 % 3 === 0, because 0 / 3 === 0 remainder 0
1 % 3 === 1, because 1 / 3 === 0 remainder 1
2 % 3 === 2, because 2 / 3 === 0 remainder 2
3 % 3 === 0, because 3 / 3 === 1 remainder 0
4 % 3 === 1, because 4 / 3 === 1 remainder 1
5 % 3 === 2, because 5 / 3 === 1 remainder 2
6 % 3 === 0, because 6 / 3 === 2 remainder 0
```

This cycle is why some people call modular arithmetic "clock arithmetic". Let's illustrate that on the board with a clock that has a 0 instead of a 12!

Let's get back to the code-along and see how we can use this to make our color changing webpage keep working forever!

## Exercises
1. Enhance your color-scheme-changing webpage to use 4, 5, 6 or more colors instead of 3. A few things have to change!
2. Challenge: enhance your HTML with more tags that each have ids or classes,
so that you can make different parts of your page change to different colors by pressing the same button.

## Adding some randomness to our pages
So far, our page does the same thing every time we click the button.
Sometimes we want that kind of predictability, but sometimes we want to surprise people!

We can use a builtin JavaScript function called `Math.random` to get random numbers between 0 and 1.
Let's try it at the console!

If I wanted random numbers between 0 and 10, how could I get those?

If we only want whole numbers, there are a few other functions we can combine with `Math.random`:
- `Math.floor`
- `Math.ceil`
- `Math.round`

Note that these functions take an argument, unlike `Math.random`.

Challenge: how about if I wanted random whole numbers between 5 and 10?

The general idea here is "mapping" or "scaling" -- it's something that comes up a lot in programming!

## More exercises
1. Write a function that takes a number as an argument, and generates random whole numbers between 0 and that number.
2. Use that function to update your color changing webpage with a button that changes the color scheme randomly instead of in a fixed order.
3. Challenge: going off of the multiple sections/colors exercise from above, have each section of the page change to a random color when the button is pressed.

## submit your work!
I want to check out your code! As always, use [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfJhvobRSHGva_j9IIJN4IAGnI1hc1CtAzR_PtFKln1YlVHFA/viewform) so I can see what you wrote.

## Project Brainstorming
Let's use the remainder of class time to think a little bit more about projects!

Next week Thursday, the 18th, Nadia will interview you about the class, coding in general, and your project ideas.

I encourage people to work in groups so that you can help each other, and get a realistic sense of what it's like to work on real coding projects.
This week I want to dedicate more time to thinking about what your interests are so we can get a sense of projects and groups.

Questions that might help you brainstorm your ideas for projects:
- What is a tool that would help you or other people in your community (family, friends, classmates, etc.)?
- What is a website or app that you like and are happy about spending a lot of time on?
- What is a game or fun website that you wish existed but you've never seen before?
