# Organization, project planning, and a peek under the hood
## The command line
The command line is a way of running programs different from what we do on the web.

If you use Mac, Terminal is installed by default.

If you use Windows, download [git bash](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/releases/tag/v2.18.0.windows.1).
We'll say more about git a little bit later today.

Glitch also has a console that simulates the same thing as the command line on our local computers!

Create a new project, but instead of the "hello-webpage" template, choose "hello-express".

From the advanced options menu, choose "Open console".
Now we can use the `node` command to have a JavaScript console a lot like the one in our browser -- but not quite the same.

Here's a [terminal reference](https://www.git-tower.com/blog/command-line-cheat-sheet/).
The most important pieces for us are "directories" and "files".

### command line exercises
- Navigate to your Desktop directory
- List all the files in there
- How many files are there in your Desktop directory?
- Delete the useless files from your Desktop

- Create a directory called code-forward in your HOME directory
- Inside the code-forward directory, create another directory called day-0
- Inside the day-0 directory, create a file called song.txt
- Open the song.txt file, and copy paste a classmate's favorite song lyrics into it
- Save the file, close it, and print the contents of song.txt in your terminal

- What is the full path of song.txt?
- What does the whoami command do?

- Create a directory called junk in your Desktop
- Move files from your Desktop into the new junk folder. Create a new file first if nothing on your Desktop is junk.

### command line enrichment
Try running `man <cmd>` on a few commands we used before, like `man ls` and `man mkdir`.
What do you learn?

Use google to learn more about commands from the terminal cheat sheet, such as `grep`.

Learn about the "pipe" operator on the command line, and combining programs:
- https://insights.dice.com/2014/01/08/intro-pipes-command-line/
- https://quickleft.com/blog/command-line-tutorials-redirection-pipes/

## Review exercises in a new environment
Write these exercises in `server.js` from the new project you created based on the "hello-express" template.
You can delete the existing code, comment it out, or just leave it.

1. Write a function which takes an array as an argument and chooses a random element.
2. Write a function which takes two arguments, an array and an item which might be in the array,
   and returns a random item that is **not** the same as the second argument.
   (You can use a function like this to choose random colors and always have the button make a change.)
3. Write a couple examples of using your function, and run them from a file via node.js on the glitch console.


## Organizing our repositories so far
Let's take a few minutes to rename and trim our projects on glitch.

## Project writing
After brainstorming silently out loud, take a few minutes to write on paper
(by yourself or with others you think you might form a group with) answers to the following questions:
1. What do I want to learn from creating a larger coding project?
2. What gift do I want to give to people who use my website or application?
