# Review of class discussion
Last time, we spoke about an Arabic programming language and the way that specific culture gets into supposedly "universal" technology. If you haven't already, write your answer to the following questions on paper and hand it in to Nabil:

- Do you think it's important for coding to be expressed in different human languages? Why or why not?
- If your friends or family were the ones designing computers and apps, how do you think it might be different from the technology we use?

# JavaScript control structures
Last week when we started with JavaScript, the programs we wrote did the same thing every time. The same action was triggered by clicking a button, or the same result was returned by a function.

In general, we want our programs to do different things depending on various conditions. The structure of a program in response to this is called "control flow". Today we will cover some of the most common and important control structures we can use in JavaScript to make our programs respond flexibly to user actions, the state of the world, or something else.

## conditional statements
The `if` statement, more formally known as a conditional, could look like this:
```
if (true) {
  console.log("hello, true");
}
```

The "condition" what is in between the parentheses after the special keyword `if`. (It should usually be of `boolean` type, but in JavaScript, that is not enforced!) Then, we open a new block using an opening curly brace `{`, put the lines of code we want to execute *only if the condition is true*, and close our block with a closing curly brace `}`.

What do you think will happen in the code above?

Of course, if you already know you want something to always happen or never happen, there's no point in using an `if`. Here's a more complex and realistic example:

```
var input = prompt("put in your favorite word");
if (input === "secret") {
  alert("you figured out the secret!");
} else if (x === ""){
  alert("you didn't enter anything!");
} else {
  alert("keep guessing to find the secret password!");
}
```

This example code shows how we can chain conditions together: `if` / `else if` / `else`. There is no limit on the number of `else if` statements -- you could have a lot, or you could zero, leaving just an `if` / `else` statement.

(One side note about `prompt`: it always considers the user's input to be a string. If you want a number, you'll have to convert it yourself by calling a function like `parseInt` on the result.)

Exercises:
```
Write a program to accept two numbers as input, and display to the user which one is larger (either using alert, or by changing the HTML on the page).

Update your program to accept more numbers.


```

## more about booleans and logic operators
Last time, we saw that there are two special keywords in JavaScript, `true` and `false`, which are the only two entities of type "boolean". But even there's only two of them, there's still a lot we can do with them!

### logical operators
There are three fundamental logic operators:
- `&&`, pronounced "and"
- `||`, pronounced "or"
- `!`, pronounced "not" (or "bang")

`&&` and `||` are *binary* operators: there should be something on each side of the operator.

`!` is a *prefix unary* operator -- it goes right before a boolean to flip its value.

What do you think results from the following?
```
true && false
false || true
!true
!(true && false)
```

Group exercise: let's write out the truth tables for these operators on the whiteboard.

### arithmetic operators
JavaScript supports the math operators you're probably used to -- they just look a little different: `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`, `===`, and `!==`.

The difference between `==` and `===`, and between `!=` and `!==`, has to do with checking for types.

I recommend using `===` and `!==` every time, and never using `==` or `!=`

Check out [this reference](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_comparisons.asp) if you ever need a reminder.

```
Exercise: write code to prompt the user for input and alert that the number is "small", "medium" or "big" according to your subjective sense of what that means.
*Hint*: look back in these notes if you run into issues with strings vs. numbers.
```

### putting it all together
Code-along: let's add a "night mode" to a webpage! [Here's the example from class](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/powerful-water?path=script.js:13:0)

Then, take a little time to make some more changes from your imagination and be sure you're comfortable.

## for loops and arrays
Array basics:
- syntax: `var myArray = [1, 2, "you can put anything in an array"]`
- indexing - `myArray[0]`, `myArray[n]`
- properties, e.g. `myArray.length`
- methods, e.g. `myArray.push("something")` and `var x = myArray.pop()`

There are two main types of for loop in JavaScript:
```
for (var x of myArray) {
  // do something with x
}

for (var i = 0; i < myArray.length; i++) {
  // do something with myArray[i]
}
```

Exercises:
1. Code-along: write a for loop which prints the numbers from 0 to 20 along with the word "even" or "odd" depending which is true for the given number.
2. Write a function which takes an array as an argument, and doubles every number in the array.
3. Write a function which takes an array and of numbers and retains only the odd numbers.

Challenge exercise: write a function called "fizzbuzz" which:
- prints the numbers 1 to 100, except that it
- prints "fizz" if the number is divisible by 3
- prints "buzz" if the number is divisible by 5
- prints "fizzbuzz" if the number is divisible by both


### extra exercises if you're done early
Enhance your "night mode" webpage with the ability to cycle through a few different colors, instead of just one.

Go back and take another try at writing a factorial function, now that you know about if statements.

Try implementing a fibonacci function. If you get it to work, try it first with small numbers, and then with big ones. Does it work with large numbers? If not, try to think of why. Ask Nabil for a hint if you get stuck.

# project brainstorming
Let's have an informal chat about the process of deciding on and building our projects. On Thursday, we'll build on this much more and start some writing about it too.
