# Review of JavaScript puzzles
Let's go through the [JavaScript puzzles](https://lightning-salary.glitch.me/) as a code-along!

Feel free to fill in solutions to the ones you didn't get to.

Remember: in programming, there's more than one way to do it. If you did it a different way than what I did, that doesn't make you wrong!

# Concepts of JavaScript
Last class, I threw a lot of JavaScript at you without doing much explaining. Today, let's focus on going deeper into understanding *why* the code works.

## introduction to functions
A `function` in JavaScript is a set of coded instructions to perform a specific task. It has a one-word name, may take inputs, and may have an output.

*Note*: in other contexts, the word "function" has a different meaning. In math, a function must always return the same output if given the same input. This is not true of JavaScript functions in general -- although, if you write your functions so that it is true for you, it could make your life easier!

Here's an example of a function:
```javascript
function helloWorld() {
  console.log("hello, world");
}
```

A function starts with the special keyword "function", then has a `name`, an `argument list`, and an opening curly brace all on the same line. Then comes the `body` of the function, which could be one line or many lines. Finally, a closing curly brace ends the function.

We can *call* this function like this:
```javascript
helloWorld();
```

Here's another example of a function:
```javascript
function helloToYou(name) {
   console.log("Hello, " + name + "!");
}
```

Here are two ways we can call this function:
```javascript
helloToYou("nabil");
helloToYou("donna");
```

What is in the parentheses is called the "argument" or "parameter" to the function.

In this case, our function `helloToYou` is expecting a "string" argument. Strings in JavaScript are surrounded by quotes (single quotes '' or double quotes "").

> Exercise: write a function which pops up a greeting (instead of printing it to the console) to a person whose name is passed as an argument.

Last class, we were filling in the "body" of functions that had no name! We'll talk more about named functions versus anonymous functions another time.

## introduction to types
You can check the `type` of different entities in JavaScript by using a special keyword (kind of like a function, but not quite) called `typeof`, like so:

```
typeof("nabil")
typeof(5)
typeof 5
typeof function() { return "hi"; }
typeof [1, 2, 3]
typeof {"key": "value"}
```

## variables
If we want to keep using a value, we can store it for later by giving it a name. These are variables.

Here are a few examples of storing a value in a variable:
```
var x = 3;
var name = "nabil";
var answer = myFunction(2, 3);
```

A variable is like a box we can put things in. Note that `=` in JavaScript means "take the value on the right, and store it in the box on the left". We call this `assignment`.

Actually checking if two things are equal is `===` which we will discuss another week.

## math functions
We can treat JavaScript as a language for solving any type of problem. Let's take math as an example.

How can we represent this math function in JavaScript? `f(x) = 2x + 1`

We need to use a special JavaScript keyword we haven't seen before: `return`.

A function that we call for its "side effects", like logging to the console or printing to the screen, doesn't need to `return` anything.

But if we want to store the results and use them again later, we have to make sure we `return` the value for use later.

> Exercises: translate the following math functions into JavaScript.
> g() = 5
> h(x) = 3x - 2
> Write a function that takes two arguments and returns double their sum.
> a(x, y, z) = 5x + 2y - 3z + 7
> b(x, y, z) = h(x) + h(y) + a(x, y, z)

This last function gives an example of how we can *reuse* functions. As programs get more complex, a good way to avoid getting confused is to write a lot of small functions that each do one thing, and then combine them together. Writing long functions that do a lot of things can get messy!

## nested functions
The last exercise proved we can call one function from within another function. This is how functions enable reuse of code. One principle of writing clean code is "Don't Repeat Yourself", or "DRY". Another is modularity: each function should do one specific thing.

We can use the same idea to define private functions -- functions within functions! Code-along: let's think about how to write a function to find the hypotenuse of a right triangle, given the lengths of the legs of the triangle. We will define a private function square inside of the public hypotenuse function.

## scope
After we do this, what happens if we try to call `square` outside of hypotenuse?

In JavaScript, local variables declared with var have function scope: they can be used inside the function they are declared in but not outside of it. The same goes for functions within functions. (There are also other types of scope in JavaScript, but these are not as essential to know.)
```
// global scope
var global;
function myFunction() {
  // local scope
  var onlyAccessibleWithinMyFunction;
  function myNestedFunction() {
    // a more narrow local scope
    var onlyAccessibleInMyNestedFunction;
  };

  function myOtherNestedFunction() {
    // a "sibling", equally narrow local scope
    var onlyAccessibleInMyOtherNestedFunction;
  };
};
```

## more exercises
> Write a function which takes a string and returns it concatenated with itself three times. Example: "hi" -> "hihihi"
> Come up with two more of your own original function ideas, one working with numbers, another working with strings!
> Challenge: write the factorial function in JavaScript. Hint: google the term "recursion" first.
> Super bonus challenge: write a function to calculate the `nth` number in the fibonacci sequence in JavaScript. If you write one that you think works, try calling with a large argument like 100 or 1000. Does your code finish quickly? If not, why do you think that might be, and how could you change it to fix the problem?
> Unlimited challenges: try solving some [Project Euler problems!](https://projecteuler.net/)

## submit your work!
I want to check out your code! As always, use [this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfJhvobRSHGva_j9IIJN4IAGnI1hc1CtAzR_PtFKln1YlVHFA/viewform) so I can see what you wrote.

# Class discussion
## Bias in tech
Let's check out this [Arabic Programming language!](http://nas.sr/%D9%82%D9%84%D8%A8/)

Questions for us to think about as a group:
- Have you ever seen a non-English programming language before?
- What do you think

Questions I'd like you all to answer on paper:
- Do you think it's important for coding to be expressed in different human languages? Why or why not?
- If your friends or family were the ones designing computers and apps, how do you think it might be different from the technology we use?
